---
title: "Abstract Data Type"
draft: false
type: "glossary"
layout: "entry"
---

### Summary
An abstract data type (ADT) is a high-level concept that defines how data is interacted with. Rather than focusing on how the data is stored or structured, an ADT stipulates the operations that can be performed on the data.

### ELI5
Imagine you have a toy box. You can't see inside the box, but you can put toys in, take them out, or check if a specific toy is inside. The box itself, combined with these actions you can do, is like an 'Abstract Data Type'. It doesn’t matter how the toys are arranged inside, what matters is what you can do with the box.

### In-depth explanation
In computer science, an Abstract Data Type (ADT) is a high-level description of a data structure that specifies the type of data, the operations that can be performed on it, and the types of those operations' parameters and return values. ADT provides an organized way to encapsulate data together with the methods to manipulate it.

ADTs decouple the specifics of data implementation from their abstract properties. This supports the software engineering principle of 'information hiding'. It allows greater program modularity and more manageable code.

Examples of ADTs include structures such as lists, stacks, queues, sets, maps, trees, and graphs. Each defines a specific set of operations. For instance, a stack ADT may define push and pop operations, a queue ADT may define enqueue and dequeue operations, and so on. These operations establish an interface through which all interactions with the data must occur. They define the operations that can be done with the datatype without specifying how these operations will be implemented.

In the field of AI and machine learning, ADTs play a crucial role in structurally organizing data fed into or generated by models, as well as organizing the data structures used in the algorithms themselves. Such organized, streamlined data manipulation results in more efficient algorithm execution, contributing to faster processing of complex calculations. ADTs also support the scalability and maintenance of AI and ML programs, as they facilitate the implementation of well-structured and modular code.

Machine learning models like decisions trees and random forests, which are based on tree data structures, illustrate the role of ADTs in AI. In NLP tasks, graph and tree ADTs enable efficient handling of syntax trees, dependency graphs, etc. For reinforcement learning, where state-action transitions are considered, data structure like graphs and maps become crucial.

### Related terms
Data structure, Information hiding, Stacks, Queues, Sets, Maps, Trees, Graphs, Modularity, Decision Trees, Random Forests
