---
title: "Human-In-The-Loop"
draft: false
type: "glossary"
layout: "entry"
---

### Summary

Human-in-the-loop refers to an AI model's architecture that depends heavily on human interaction for decision-making or learning. In this approach, humans validate or correct the outputs generated by the machine learning model, influencing the final decision-making process.

### ELI5

Imagine, you're baking cookies with a friend who's never baked before. They're doing most of the work, but you're there to guide them; maybe you help them decide if the dough needs more sugar, or when the cookies are done baking. In this situation, you're the 'Human-In-The-Loop', guiding and teaching your friend (the machine learning model) to make the best cookies.

### In-depth explanation

Human-In-The-Loop (HITL) is an approach to machine learning where human judgment or decision making is included into the learning process or system workflow. The human's role in HITL is principally twofold:

1. **Validation:** The human-in-the-loop verifies and, if necessary, corrects model outputs. In classification tasks, for example, a human might confirm a model’s predicted category, or assign a new one if the prediction is incorrect. This feedback is then used to retrain and improve the model.

2. **Decision-making:** In applications where decisions carry considerable consequences, a HITL approach may be adopted to drive strategic decisions. For instance, a machine learning model might predict a list of high-risk patients in a healthcare setting, but a human doctor would review these predictions, possibly altering the course of treatment.

HITL is often adopted to balance the desire for automation with the necessity for human intellect and analysis - marrying the capacity of ML to process vast amounts of data rapidly with the human ability for complex reasoning and judgement. It is particularly beneficial in scenarios where data is highly variable or unlabeled, a full automation is technically challenging or risky, or the consequences of machine error are high.

It's also crucial in 'Active Learning', a semi-supervised learning strategy. With active learning, the model selects the instances from unlabelled data for which it would like to know the labels to learn effectively. The human-in-the-loop provides these labels, therefore directly influencing the learning process.

Overall, a Human-in-the-loop setup facilitates model improvement by harnessing human expertise, ensures oversight and control over automated systems, and can provide ethical, legal, and societal safeguards in decision-making settings.

### Related terms

Active Learning, Semi-Supervised Learning, Supervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Labeling, Machine Learning Model, Decision Making, Validation, Interpretability.

