---
title: "Model Checking"
draft: false
type: "glossary"
layout: "entry"
---

### Summary
Model checking is an automated approach to verify that a model adheres to certain properties or specifications. It’s a process done by comparing the model's predictions and behaviors against the original requirements.

### ELI5
Model checking is like playing a game of guess and check. Imagine you've made a drawing (your model), and you want to make sure it looks exactly like a picture (the specification) you were given. You keep comparing your drawing to the picture, checking every small detail until you're certain they match!

### In-depth explanation
Model checking is a crucial part of AI and ML, serving as a method for systematic and automated examination of the behaviors and outputs generated by a model across a wide range of inputs and conditions. It is fundamentally the process of checking if a proposed model satisfies a set of given properties or specifications. For instance, in autonomous driving applications, model checking could be used to validate that an AI drives safely across a multitude of potential road scenarios.

Model checking works by creating a state space, made of all possible states that a system can be in, and then uses various algorithms to search through that space for states that do not meet the specified properties. It attempts to answer "can the system reach a bad state" and if so, it provides a counter-example, which is the sequence of actions leading to that bad state.

This approach is very objective and exhaustive, making it a reliable method for verifying a model against the properties. However, it does come with a significant drawback known as the 'state explosion problem'. This problem refers to the exponential growth in the number of states with the increase in the size of the model, which can make model checking computationally complex.

The model checking process is very much iterative, and requires an accurate specification to be effective. This is why the process of creating those specifications is also crucial, and often requires input from domain experts, stakeholders, and ethical considerations.

To execute model checking in practical AI and ML environments, a series of techniques could be applied, including symbolic model checking, bounded model checking, and explicit-state model checking. They involve different methods to traverse the state space or reduce its size, making the model checking problem more tractable.

### Related terms
State Space, Verification, Counter-Example, Specification, Symbolic Model Checking, Bounded Model Checking, Explicit-State Model Checking, State Explosion Problem.```

